Tuning Motion guide (#6877)
blakeblackshear/frigate: docs/docs/configuration/motion_detection.md

## Masking Out Known Motion Causes

The first step would be to mask out causes of motion that are known to not be objects. This includes things like timestamps, tree limbs, larger bushes, etc. More details can be found [in the masks docs.](/configuration/masks.md).

## Prepare For Testing

The easiest way to tune motion detection is to do it live, have one window / screen open with the frigate debug view and motion boxes enabled with another window / screen open allowing for configuring the motion settings. It is recommended to use Home Assistant or MQTT as they offer live configuration of some motion settings meaning that Frigate does not need to be restarted when values are changed.

In Home Assistant the `Improve Contrast`, `Contour Area`, and `Threshold` configuration entities are disabled by default but can easily be enabled and used to tune live, otherwise MQTT can be used.

## Tuning Motion Detection During The Day

Now that things are set up, find a time to tune that represents normal circumstances. For example: If you tune your motion on a day that is sunny and windy you may find later that the motion settings are not sensitive enough on a cloudy and still day.

:::note

> It is very unlikely to find motion detection settings that only detect desired motion and never detect undesired motion. Realistically, the goal is to find a balance that detects the desired motion without too much undesired motion being detected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remember that motion detection is just used to determine when object detection should be used. You should aim to have motion detection sensitive enough that you won't miss events from objects you want to detect with object detection. The goal is to prevent object detection from running constantly for every small pixel change in the image. Windy days are still going to result in lots of motion being detected.
```

:::

### Threshold

The threshold value dictates how much of a change in a pixels luminance is required to be considered motion. 

```yaml
# default threshold value
motion:
  # Optional: The threshold passed to cv2.threshold to determine if a pixel is different enough to be counted as motion. (default: shown below)
  # Increasing this value will make motion detection less sensitive and decreasing it will make motion detection more sensitive.
  # The value should be between 1 and 255.
  threshold: 30
```

Lower values mean motion detection is more sensitive to changes in color, making it more likely for example to detect motion when a brown dogs blends in with a brown fence or a person wearing a red shirt blends in with a red car. If the threshold is too low however, it may detect things like grass blowing in the wind, shadows, etc. to be detected as motion.

> Watching the motion boxes in the debug view, adjust the threshold until the undesired motion is not detected. Once this is done, it is important to test and ensure that desired motion is still detected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Watching the motion boxes in the debug view, increase the threshold until you only see motion that is visible to the eye. Once this is done, it is important to test and ensure that desired motion is still detected.
```

## Tuning Motion Detection During The Night

Once daytime motion detection is tuned, there is a chance that the settings will work well for motion detection during the night as well. If this is the case then the preferred settings can be written to the config file and left alone. 

However, if the preferred day settings do not work well at night it is recommended to use HomeAssistant or some other solution to automate changing the settings. That way completely separate sets of motion settings can be used for optimal day and night motion detection.

## Tuning For Large Changes In Motion

```yaml
# default lightning_threshold:
motion:
  # Optional: The percentage of the image used to detect lightning or other substantial changes where motion detection
  #           needs to recalibrate. (default: shown below)
  # Increasing this value will make motion detection more likely to consider lightning or ir mode changes as valid motion.
  # Decreasing this value will make motion detection more likely to ignore large amounts of motion such as a person approaching
  # a doorbell camera.
  lightning_threshold: 0.8
```

:::tip

> Some cameras like doorbell cameras may have missed detections when someone walks right by due to the motion detection being re-calibrated. In this case it may be desirable to increase the `lightning_threshold` to ensure these events are not missed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some cameras like doorbell cameras may have missed detections when someone walks directly in front of the camera and the lightning_threshold causes motion detection to be re-calibrated. In this case, it may be desirable to increase the `lightning_threshold` to ensure these events are not missed.
```

:::

> Larges changes in motion like PTZ moves and camera switches between Color and IR mode should result in no motion detection. This is done via the `lightning_threshold` configuration. It is defined as the percentage of the image used to detect lightning or other substantial changes where motion detection needs to recalibrate. Increasing this value will make motion detection more likely to consider lightning or IR mode changes as valid motion. Decreasing this value will make motion detection more likely to ignore large amounts of motion such as a person approaching a doorbell camera.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Large changes in motion like PTZ moves and camera switches between Color and IR mode should result in no motion detection. This is done via the `lightning_threshold` configuration. It is defined as the percentage of the image used to detect lightning or other substantial changes where motion detection needs to recalibrate. Increasing this value will make motion detection more likely to consider lightning or IR mode changes as valid motion. Decreasing this value will make motion detection more likely to ignore large amounts of motion such as a person approaching a doorbell camera.
```
